# Dataset Format

This page documents the folder structure and file formats of the **NN-ready dataset**, which is the user-facing dataset for NN training and testing on the AC-OPF task. See [Inspecting Results](@ref "Inspecting Results") to understand where this folder is located relative to the main results folder. A complete example dataset with 1000 AC-OPF samples is available at [this folder](https://github.com/mttb91/HEDGeOPF.jl/tree/main/examples/pglib_opf_case5_pjm/example/test/), being generated with six remote workers using [these configuration options](https://github.com/mttb91/HEDGeOPF.jl/blob/main/examples/settings.yaml).

## Main Level

At the upper level, the dataset is organized into the following structure

```text
test/
├── bus/
│   ├── va-1.parquet
│   ├── ...
│   ├── vm-1.parquet
│   └── ...
├── branch/
│   └── ...
├── .../
├── graph/
│   ├── 1.zip
│   └── ...
└── map.parquet
```

with the following elements:

* Component folders, one for each power system component that has at least one variable in the PowerModels' optimisation model (e.g., `bus`, `branch`, `gen`, etc.), storing variable values **in per-unit** across multiple AC-OPF instances. *This implies that AC-OPF inputs and outputs pertaining to the same AC-OPF instance are distributed across multiple files*.
* A `graph` folder containing static power system information (i.e., data that does not vary for a given topology) for every topology perturbation available in the dataset. *Therefore, static data is not duplicated for every AC-OPF instance associated with the same topology*.
* A global mapping file `map.parquet`, which enables matching each AC-OPF with its reference topology and with additional instance-specific AC-OPF metadata (e.g., objective value) through the instance UID. This file has as many rows as the number of AC-OPF instances selected with the splitting strategy (see [`DATASET` Options](@ref "dataset-options")) and is organized into the following columns.

| Key                 | Type      | Unit     | Description                                                                 |
|---------------------|:---------:|:--------:|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `uid`               | `Int64`   | [1]      | Unique identifier of the AC-OPF instance                                    |
| `fold`              | `Int64`   | [1]      | Cross-validation fold to which the AC-OPF instance is assigned              |
| `worker`            | `Int64`   | [1]      | Index of distributed worker that generated the instance                     |
| `case`              | `Int64`   | [1]      | Index of the case among those generated by the specified worker             |
| `topology_id`       | `Int64`   | [1]      | Index of the topology associated with the AC-OPF instance                   |
| `termination_status`| `Int64`   | –        | Binary termination status (1 means converged)                               |
| `pd_tot`            | `Float64` | [p.u.]   | Total load active power of the instance                                     |
| `objective`         | `Float64` | [€]      | Primal objective value of the AC-OPF solution                               |
| `solve_time`        | `Float64` | [s]      | Time taken by the solver to solve the instance                              |

!!! note
    The AC-OPF formulation employs load slack variables to improve convergence (see the reference [publication](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.19083) for details). Therefore, the `objective` value accounts for the activation of such variables alongside generator costs.

!!! note
    The UID can also be used to check results reproducibility. See [Verifying Reproducibility](@ref "Verifying Reproducibility") for a practical guide on how reproducibility works and how to perform this check.

## Graph Level

The `graph` folder contains `TOPOLOGY.num_top + 1` ZIP archives, with the original, intact topology always saved as `1.zip`. Each archive consists of the following set of CSV files:

* One for each *non-empty* power system component dictionary in the PowerModels `ref` model, where each component CSV file contains all static input features defined in PowerModels' [Network Data Dictionary](https://lanl-ansi.github.io/PowerModels.jl/stable/network-data/#The-Network-Data-Dictionary), alongside a few others introduced in the generation process. These are provided in per-unit.
* Bus admittance matrix `_Ybus.csv` and branch admittance matrices at the from (`_Yf.csv`) and the to (`_Yt.csv`) buses in COO format.
* Approximate prime (`_Bp.csv`) and double-prime (`_Bpp.csv`) susceptance matrices in COO format for Fast Decoupled power flow computations.

Each CSV matrix in COO format follows the structure below. Depending on the matrix, only the `re` column may be present, or both `re` and `im`.

| rows | cols |        re         |         im          |
|:----:|:----:|:-----------------:|:-------------------:|
|  1   |  1   | 14.7681599667342  | -56.71804496776893  |
|  2   |  1   | -9.7316183798614  | 32.829555980255364  |
| ...  |  ... |        ...        |         ...         |

!!! note
    For a given power system, all CSV files are built from its PowerModels' `ref` model. Therefore, **elements of a given component type that are already faulted/deactivated in the original, intact topology do not appear in these files**. Correct component indexing is nevertheless maintained in order to allow referencing the original MATPOWER files.

!!! warning
    **For a given perturbation ZIP archive, faulted branches and generators still appear in the respective component CSV files** since the JuMP model is modified in-place without re-instantiating the PowerModels model. See [Topology Perturbations](@ref "Topology Perturbations") and [Generator Perturbations](@ref "Generator Perturbations") to understand how they are signalled. In contrast, **admittances and susceptance matrices are already computed over the reduced subset of active branches**.

!!! warning
    Indexing is one-based since the dataset is generated in Julia.

## Component Level

Each component folder contains dynamic input and/or output data in per-unit for all the variables associated with the component (e.g., voltage angle `va` and magnitude `vm` for the `bus` component). For a given variable `var`, data belonging to multiple AC-OPF instances is grouped by cross-validation `fold`, as defined by the splitting strategy, and saved to a Parquet file using the naming convention `"$var-$fold.parquet"`.

```text
bus/
├── va-1.parquet
├── va-2.parquet
├── ...
├── vm-1.parquet
├── vm-2.parquet
└── ...
```

As exemplified below for the voltage magnitude variable `vm` at the buses of the `pglib_opf_case5_pjm.m` test case, each Parquet has:

* as many rows as the number of AC-OPF instances assigned to the fold
* as many columns as the number of active elements of a given component type in the original, intact PowerModels `ref` model plus one UID column, which is always reported as first column. *The UID must be used to enable robust matching of variables scattered across multiple files for the same AC-OPF instance*.

| uid |   1   |   2   |   3   |   4   |   5   |
|:---:|:-----:|:-----:|:-----:|:-----:|:-----:|
| 23  | 1.060 | 1.031 | 1.033 | 0.997 | 1.001 |
|  3  | 1.044 | 1.018 | 1.025 | 0.972 | 0.975 |
| 56  | 1.058 | 1.029 | 1.048 | 0.994 | 0.999 |
| ... |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |

!!! note
    Currently, variables `pd` and `qd` under the `load` component provide active and reactive load power values that are feasible for an AC-OPF formulation *without load slack variables*. In other words, **they are already corrected for the slack activations**.
