# Quick Start Guide

Once the installation of HEDGeOPF is successfully completed, it is possible to generate an AC-OPF dataset for a given power system test case by following a few steps. Start by placing at a path of your choosing:

* the network data file in .m format (e.g., `pglib_opf_case5_pjm.m` from [PGLib-OPF](https://github.com/power-grid-lib/pglib-opf) library);
* the configuration YAML file [`settings.yaml`](https://github.com/mttb91/HEDGeOPF.jl/blob/main/examples/settings.yaml) that controls the simulation.

Open the configuration YAML file and set:

* entries `grid` and `num_samples` under section `CASE` to the grid file name as string (e.g., `"pglib_opf_case5_pjm.m"`) and the desired number of AC-OPF samples (e.g., 1000), respectively;
* entry `name` under section `DATASET` to the desired string name of the dataset in NN-ready format (e.g., `"test"`).

If needed, change entry `cpu_ratio` under section `PARALLEL` to the desired percentage of CPU threads relative to `Sys.CPU_THREADS` that are used for distributed computing. Do not modify parameter `input` under section `PATH`, since the grid .m file is searched at the path `joinpath(PATH.input, CASE.grid)` relative to the root one.

```yaml
CASE:
    grid : "pglib_opf_case5_pjm.m"
    name : "example"
    ...
    num_samples : 1000

DATASET:
    name : "test"
    cleanup: false
    num_samples : null
    ...
...

PARALLEL:
    cpu_ratio : 50.0

PATH:
    input  : ""
    output : ""
```

Save and close the YAML file. Then, in Julia run

```julia
using HEDGeOPF
import HiGHS, Ipopt

path = "/path/of/your/choosing"
generate_dataset(path; filename = "settings.yaml")
```

## Inspecting Results

During dataset generation, the current working directory is set automatically to the dataset destination folder. Once the process has terminated, this can be inspected by simply running

```julia
julia> readdir()
16-element Vector{String}:
 "branch"
 "bus"
 "gen"
 "graph"
 "info-1.csv"
 ⋮
 "map.csv"
 "polytope.csv"
 "rng_state.bin"
 "settings.yaml"
 "test"
```

Folder `bus` consists of the following CSV files for bus voltage phase angle `va` and magnitude `vm`. In this example, file count indicates that the dataset has been generated by parallelising over 6 distributed workers.

```julia
julia> readdir("bus")
12-element Vector{String}:
 "va-1.csv"
 "va-2.csv"
 "va-3.csv"
 "va-4.csv"
 "va-5.csv"
 "va-6.csv"
 "vm-1.csv"
 "vm-2.csv"
 "vm-3.csv"
 "vm-4.csv"
 "vm-5.csv"
 "vm-6.csv"
```

Folder `test` contains the NN-ready dataset, which is mostly based on Parquet files instead of CSV ones, with files grouped by cross-validation fold rather than by parallel worker (see [Dataset Format](dataset.md) for a detailed explanation of its format). **This folder alone contains all information needed for NN training and testing on the AC-OPF task**. Except for `settings.yaml`, which stores the simulation setup, the remaining files and folders can be automatically deleted by setting entry `cleanup` in section `DATASET` of the YAML file to `true`.

!!! note
    Nevertheless, entry `cleanup` of section `DATASET` should be kept to `false` if the user may need to extend the existing dataset by generating additional AC-OPF samples, or to create new NN-ready partitions from the same source data.

## Regenerating Dataset Splits

The following example shows how to generate a new NN-ready dataset for the same data source with, for example, fewer than 10000 AC-OPF instances. This requires generating, beforehand, an AC-OPF dataset with the `DATASET.cleanup` option set to `false`, so that all dataset artifacts are retained. If this condition is met, generating a new NN-ready split can be simply achieved by modifying only the following entries of the YAML configuration file

```yaml
DATASET:
    name : "test-v2"
    num_samples : 5000
    ...
```

Then run in Julia

```julia
path = "/path/of/your/choosing"
generate_split(path; filename = "settings.yaml")
```

This downsamples the original dataset, retaining only approximately 5000 AC-OPF instances and grouping them into cross-validation folds. As a result, folder `test-v2` is expected to appear in `readdir()` output.

!!! note
    Currently, users have limited control over the splitting strategy. This is selected internally based on whether the dataset includes a single topology or multiple topology perturbations. In the first case, AC-OPF instances are partitioned into folds stratified by total load active power, with samples binned into quantiles. In the second case, topology perturbations are distributed randomly across folds (see [`DATASET` Options](@ref "dataset-options") for details on the control parameters).

## Extending Dataset

If the first dataset-generation run was performed with `DATASET.cleanup` set to `false`, it is also possible to extend the dataset with new AC-OPF instances. This can be simply done by modifying only the following YAML entries, leaving the rest unchanged

```yaml
CASE:
    append : true
    ...
```

Then run again in Julia

```julia
path = "/path/of/your/choosing"
generate_dataset(path; filename = "settings.yaml")
```

This will generate `CASE.num_samples` new AC-OPF instances. Sampling is resumed from the previously saved Random Number Generator (RNG) state, which is stored as `rng_state.bin` in the results folder.

!!! warning
    If `append` is `true` and no RNG state file is available, **remember to change the RNG seed** `baseseed` under section `CASE` to avoid regenerating the same dataset.

!!! note
    Since new results are appended to the existing per-worker CSV files, the number of distributed workers should match the one used at the previous run. This is only relevant if runs are performed on machines with different hardware.

## Verifying Reproducibility

For a given version of Julia and selected solvers, the HEDGeOPF workflow is reproducible up to and including dataset partitioning into folds. Reproducibility is controlled by the `baseseed` entry in the YAML file:

```yaml
CASE:
    baseseed : 0
    ...
```

In practice, dataset generation is deterministic up to AC-OPF instance ordering, since samples are assigned to workers dynamically in distributed computing. Therefore, directly comparing per-worker CSV files generated in separate runs may fail even when the setup is identical. To ensure reproducibility, once generation ends, AC-OPF instances are internally sorted by total load active power `pd_tot`, primal objective value `objective`, and topology perturbation ID `topology_id` (in this exact order). They are then assigned a UID in the range `1:CASE.num_samples`, which is stored in the `map.csv` file and is used to partition AC-OPF instances into folds.

To verify reproducibility at the level of dataset generation, across different runs with the same setup (except for `CASE.name` which is set to `"example-1"` and `"example-2"`, respectively), it is possible to inspect the `map.csv` file

```julia
import HEDGeOPF._DF as DF 
import HEDGeOPF.CSV as CSV

# Set base path as parent folder of the two datasets (after "example-2" has been generated)
path = dirname(pwd())
file1 = joinpath(path, "example-1", "map.csv")
file2 = joinpath(path, "example-2", "map.csv")

df1 = CSV.read(file1, DF.DataFrame)
df2 = CSV.read(file2, DF.DataFrame)
```

Without sorting the two dataframes by UID, values for columns `pd_tot`, `objective` and `topology_id` will likely not match

```julia
cols = [:pd_tot, :objective]
check = isapprox.(Matrix(df1[!, cols]), Matrix(df2[!, cols]); atol = 1e-8)
println(all(check))

# Column :topology_id is integer-based, so it is checked separately
check = isequal.(df1[!, :topology_id], df2[!, :topology_id])
println(all(check))
```

After sorting the two dataframes by column `uid`, values for columns `pd_tot`, `objective` and `topology_id` should match

```julia
DF.sort!(df1, :uid)
DF.sort!(df2, :uid)

check = isapprox.(Matrix(df1[!, cols]), Matrix(df2[!, cols]); atol = 1e-8)
println(all(check))

check = isequal.(df1[!, :topology_id], df2[!, :topology_id])
println(all(check))
```

While the column that registers parallel worker ID should remain different across runs

```julia
check = isequal.(df1[!, :worker], df2[!, :worker])
println(all(check))
```

## Promoting Reproducibility

When generating an AC-OPF dataset for a new [PGLib-OPF](https://github.com/power-grid-lib/pglib-opf) power system test case for NN training and testing, it is still possible to guarantee reproducibility at the dataset level without sharing the actual dataset. This requires reporting values for the following minimal set of configuration options (see [Configuration Options](configuration.md) for a detailed explanation of each parameter), alongside:

* Julia version
* R version
* Version of `volesti` R package
* Version of solvers used for linear and non-linear programming
* Version of [PGLib-OPF](https://github.com/power-grid-lib/pglib-opf) library

```yaml
CASE:
    grid : "pglib_opf_case5_pjm.m"
    ...
    num_samples : 10000
    num_batches : 2
    num_items   : 1

TOPOLOGY:
    k_min_branch : 1
    k_max_branch : 3
    k_min_gen    : 0
    k_max_gen    : 1
    num_topo     : 50

SAMPLING:
    delta_pd : 100.0
    delta_qd : 100.0
    delta_pf : 0.05
    max_pf   : 0.99
    min_pf   : 0.01

DATASET:
    ...
    num_folds     : 10 
    num_samples   : null
    num_quantiles : 20 

MODEL:
    ...
    voll : 3000.0

SOLVER:
    lp          : "HiGHS"
    lp_options  :
        solver            : "ipm"  
    nlp         : "Ipopt"
    nlp_options :
        max_cpu_time      : 1000.0
        mumps_mem_percent : 10
        print_level       : 0
```

Overall, while this solution is viable, sharing directly the NN-ready datasets remains a more robust practice for reproducibility.
